=============================
Release 1.12.1 - 06. Mai 2026
=============================

Dieses Release ist ein Feature-Release. Es gibt einige neuer Features im Core
von SmartHomeNG und den Plugins.

|

.. only:: develop_branch

.. note::

        Diese Release Notes sind ein Arbeitsstand des **develop** Branches.

         - Berücksichtigt sind Commits im smarthome Repository bis inkl. 
           ('')

         - Berücksichtigt sind Commits im plugins Repository bis inkl. 
           ('')


Überblick
=========

Dieses ist neues Release für SmartHomeNG. Die Änderungen gegenüber dem Release 
v1.12.0 sind im Folgenden in diesen Release Notes beschrieben.


Minimum Python Version
----------------------

Die minimale Python-Version, die von SmartHomeNG unterstützt wird, ist **Python 3.10**.

Es ist ggf. möglich, SmartHomeNG auch auf früheren Python-Versionen laufen zu lassen. 
Dies ist aber nicht getestet, und möglicherweise nutzen z.B. einzelne Plugins Sprachfeatures,
die erst ab Python 3.10 unterstützt werden. 
Insofern kann für Versuche in dieser Hinsicht kein Support geleistet werden. 

Bei einer Neuinstallation wird jedoch empfohlen, auf einer der neueren
Python-Versionen (3.12 oder 3.13) aufzusetzen.


Unterstützte Python Versionen
-----------------------------

Offiziell unterstützt werden im SmartHomeNG Release 1.12.1 die Python-Versionen 3.10, 3.11, 3.12 und 3.13.
Automatisierte Tests von SmartHomeNG werden nur in den unterstützten Python Versionen durchgeführt.
(Siehe auch :ref:`Hard- u. Software Anforderungen <python_versionen>` im Abschnitt **Installation**
zu unterstützten Python Versionen)

|

Änderungen am Core
==================

Allgemein
---------

* example plugins: enhance, add tests, add instructions in contributing.md

* workflows:

  * update workflows and hooks, update docu
  * local check/test before pushing (optional)
  * build dev-doc only on upstream repository
  * update workflows, implement linting & error checking
  * update pyproject.toml: exclude previous plugin versions and logics from linting

* tests:

  * improve lib.item tests for refactoring
  * further improvements, minor fixes
  * add/update tests for libraries


Updates im Core
---------------

* rename logic (adminui, lib.logic)

* detect and report undefined group references in get_logics_info(), cross-reference all logic_groupname values against the defined groups in logic_groups.yaml. unknown references are collected into an 'unknown_groups' dict ({groupname: [logicnames]}) and included in the api response alongside the existing groups field. each unknown reference also emits a warning log line on the backend. this powers the warning ui in the admin frontend without requiring any auto-correction of user-edited files.

* store group definitions in etc/logic_groups.yaml

* Libs:

  * lib.item:

    * fix eval nameerror processing
    * partial struct inclusion — import sub-trees of a struct by dotted path
    * eval namespace doc, ruff cleanup, _casting.py eval wiring
    * explicit eval namespace with legacy compat shim
    * complete refactoring
    * only try compat shim for nameerror

  * lib.log:

    * fix bug
    * enable logger reconfig without reload

  * lib.metadata:

    * fix: return string if language dict not available

  * lib.plugin:

    * fix error in reload logic

  * lib.scene:

    * fix bug, log warning instead of raising exception

  * lib.smarthome:

    * skip deprecated crypto ciphers
 
* Modules:

  * module.admin:

    * fix websocket race condition, production path calculation, global_structs error
    * add develop log level
    * build info, fix scroll and log display
    * fix scrolling, use dialogs with keys
    * add support for small screens
    * add new system config parameters, fix logic/group editing (also in core/api)
    * fix appreadyguard, deletelogicgroup, layout (also: lib.logic)
    * improvements to logics editor (rename, merge groups), layout structured and unified
    * new logics group editor, layout fixes, tests; moved logic_groups definition to etc/logic_groups.yaml
    * fix file selection
    * deprecate and ignore websocket host/port as these are set in the websocket module
    * fixes and improvements, edit all struct files
    * fixes to resource graphs and license text
    * enable sorting/filtering of lists
    * fix layout, dont overwrite existing files
    * streamline design details
    * fix/enhance loggers list
    * fix pypi endpoint to use cached package_list
    * add item tree/detail/update and pypi endpoints to rest api
    * migration auf angular20 fortgesetzt, regressionen behoben
    * update to adminui v1.0.0
    * fix path resolution for adminui, cleanup
    * add load/unload/reload methods

  * module.admin.api_files:

    * enable log file backup

|

Änderungen an Plugins
=====================

* database:

  * update workflows for testing

* stateengine:

  * minor code adjustments based on pr #1042
  * fix negative delay/suspend_remaining edge case
  * improve queue lock
  * fix overwrite handling
  * remove useless line
  * get rid of stupid action scheduler.
  * change version to 2.3.0
  * further scheduler/trigger fixes
  * another important scheduler fix to avoid multiple triggers at the same time
  * adapt scheduler (important)
  * cleanup scheduler (remove item scheduler for now)
  * update scheduler handling
  * remove item scheduler
  * improve scheduler
  * improve value handling
  * fix docu link
  * improve action scheduler, prepare internal item scheduler

* uzsu:

  * minor code improvement based on https://github.com/smarthomeng/plugins/pull/1042
  * fix issue with activetoday
  * fix sunrise/set calculation

|

Weitere Änderungen
==================

Dokumentation
-------------

* add new developer docs to dev subfolder

module.admin
~~~~~~~~~~~~
* AdminUI updated to v1.12.1
